and FORD.
We go further, so you can.
>> WHO'S RESPONSIBLE WHEN A
STUDENT DIES AFTER BEING HAZED
AT COLLEGE?
>> YO, GET OUT OF THE ROOM, YOU
GUYS.
>> THAT'S WHAT "60 MINUTES"
TRIED TO FIND OUT, AFTER A
FRESHMAN DIED FROM ALCOHOL
POISONING AT A FRATERNITY HOUSE
AT WASHINGTON STATE UNIVERSITY.
>> HAD HE SAID, "NO, I DON'T
WANT TO DRINK," I'M CONFIDENT
THAT HE WOULD NOT HAVE HAD TO
HAVE TO DRINK.
>> HE'D ALREADY HAD DATE NIGHT.
ACTUALLY IT'S CALLED "BLACK-OUT
DATE NIGHT," I BELIEVE.
( TICKING )
>> THESE ARE THE VIRUNGA
VOLCANOES, HOME TO MOST OF THE
WORLD'S MOUNTAIN GORILLAS.
DIAN FOSSEY APTLY CALLED THEM
GORILLAS IN THE MIST.
BUT WHEN THE MIST LIFTS?
THEY ARE GORILLAS IN THE SUN,
DOING WHAT MOUNTAIN GORILLAS DO:
EAT, REST, EAT SOME MORE, AND
SNUGGLE.
>> WHEN YOU LOOK IN THE EYES OF
A GORILLA, YOU SEE A KINDRED
SPIRIT LOOKING BACK AT YOU.
( TICKING )
>> READY IF YOU ARE?
>> YES!
YOU WANT ME TO SLATE MYSELF?
>> YES, PLEASE.
>> RIGHT.
RITA MORENO, WITH ONE OF THE
WORLD'S HANDSOMEST MEN OF COLOR.
EVER.
>> OKAY, INTERVIEW OVER!
( LAUGHTER )
>> WE'RE DONE.
>> CAN'T DO ANY BETTER THAN
THAT.
OKAY, I JUST WANT TO ASK YOU
ABOUT THE OBVIOUS-- ALL OF YOUR
HONORS AND AWARDS.
>> AIN'T IT GRAND?
♪ ♪ ♪
(♪ "AMERICA" ♪)
>> LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, RITA
MORENO!
>> THIS IS MARVELOUS!
( TICKING )
>> I'M LESLEY STAHL.
>> I'M BILL WHITAKER.
>> I'M ANDERSON COOPER.
>> I'M SHARYN ALFONSI.
>> I'M JON WERTHEIM.
>> I'M SCOTT PELLEY.
THOSE STORIES AND MORE, TONIGHT,
ON "60 MINUTES."
( TICKING )
>> Anderson Cooper: WE'VE ALL
HEARD THE STORY: A HEALTHY YOUNG
MAN IS HOSPITALIZED OR DIES
AFTER BEING HAZED PLEDGING A
COLLEGE FRATERNITY.
DESPITE YEARS OF EDUCATION
CAMPAIGNS AND ATTEMPTS TO STOP
UNDERAGE DRINKING, THE HAZING
CONTINUES.
SOME VICTIMS' PARENTS ARE
WORKING WITH LEADERS OF NATIONAL
FRATERNITIES, PUSHING FOR
TOUGHER LAWS AGAINST HAZING,
WHILE OTHER PARENTS CHARGE THE
NATIONAL FRATERNITIES THAT
OVERSEE THE LOCAL CHAPTERS, ARE,
THEMSELVES, PART OF THE PROBLEM.
WHEN A FRESHMAN NAMED SAM
MARTINEZ DIED PLEDGING ALPHA TAU
OMEGA AT WASHINGTON STATE
UNIVERSITY IN 2019, HIS PARENTS
SAID THE NATIONAL FRATERNITY HID
THE LOCAL CHAPTER'S HISTORY OF
HAZING, AND HINDERED THE
INVESTIGATION INTO THEIR SON'S
DEATH.
>> Jolayne Houtz: IF WE HAD
KNOWN EVEN A FRACTION OF WHAT WE
KNOW NOW, SAM NEVER WOULD'VE
WANTED TO JOIN THAT FRATERNITY.
WE FEEL DUPED.
>> Cooper: BY WHOM?
>> Houtz: BY ALPHA TAU OMEGA,
THE NATIONAL FRATERNITY, THE
CHAPTER ON THAT CAMPUS, AND BY
WASHINGTON STATE UNIVERSITY.
>> Cooper: JOLAYNE HOUTZ AND
HECTOR MARTINEZ SAID THEY KNEW
THEIR SON, SAM, HAD BEEN
PLEDGING ALPHA TAU OMEGA FOR
MORE THAN TWO MONTHS, BUT WERE
UNAWARE THAT, ACCORDING TO THE
POLICE REPORT, SOME WITNESSES
SAID HE'D ALREADY ENDURED BEING
HIT, TACKLED, AND ASKED TO
CONSUME LARGE QUANTITIES OF
ALCOHOL BY A.T.O. MEMBERS.
THEY LAST SPOKE WITH SAM AROUND
5:00 P.M. ON NOVEMBER 11, 2019.
>> Houtz: WE TOLD HIM THAT WE
LOVED HIM.
AND HE SAID, "I LOVE YOU TOO."
AND THAT WAS THE LAST TIME THAT
WE GOT TO TALK TO HIM.
>> Hector Martinez: I REMEMBER
WE, WE S-- WE SAY, "TAKE CARE OF
YOURSELF."
AND HE SAY, "DON'T WORRY, I GOT
IT."
>> Cooper: AROUND 9:00 P.M., SAM
WAS SUMMONED BY FRATERNITY
MEMBERS TO "BIG LITTLE NIGHT,"
WHEN EACH PLEDGE LEARNED WHO
THEIR "BIG BROTHER" WAS, AND,
ACCORDING TO POLICE, GOT
INTRODUCED TO THE SO-CALLED
"FAMILY DRINK."
A.T.O. RULES FORBID HAZING AND
ALCOHOL AT THE FRATERNITY HOUSE,
BUT SAM RECORDED THIS VIDEO
SHORTLY AFTER HE AND ANOTHER
PLEDGE WERE GIVEN NEARLY HALF A
GALLON OF RUM BY THEIR "BIG
BROTHER"- THE EQUIVALENT OF
ABOUT 40 SHOTS.
>> Gary Jenkins: AND BASICALLY
TOLD, "GO AHEAD AND START
DRINKING."
>> Cooper: TWO PEOPLE DRINKING
ALMOST HALF A GALLON OF RUM?
>> Jenkins: CORRECT.
>> Cooper: GARY JENKINS IS CHIEF
OF POLICE IN PULLMAN,
WASHINGTON, WHERE WASHINGTON
STATE UNIVERSITY IS LOCATED.
HE OVERSAW THE INVESTIGATION
INTO SAM MARTINEZ' DEATH.
>> Jenkins: IT WAS ABOUT A HALF
AN HOUR LATER, THAT, WITNESSES
WERE TELLING US, THERE WAS ONLY
ABOUT 2.5 INCHES LEFT IN THAT--
>> Cooper: WOW.
>> Jenkins: --HALF-GALLON
BOTTLE.
>> Cooper: IT WASN'T THE FIRST
VIOLATION OF A.T.O.'S
DRY POLICY THAT SEMESTER.
SAM SHOT THIS VIDEO IN THE
FRATERNITY BASEMENT IN AUGUST.
ONE YOUNG MAN IS LEANING OVER A
GARBAGE CAN.
TWO OTHERS APPEAR PASSED OUT.
THIS ONE IS PROPPED UP WITH A
BACKPACK.
>> Jenkins: THEY WOULD PUT A
BACKPACK ON SOMEONE SO THEY
WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO STAY ON
THEIR BACK AND POTENTIALLY
INHALE THEIR OWN VOMIT WHILE
THEY WERE UNCONSCIOUS.
>> Cooper: ACCORDING TO THE
POLICE REPORT, WHEN SAM PASSED
OUT, HE TOO WAS LEFT ON A SOFA
IN THE BASEMENT.
HE DIED OF ACUTE ALCOHOL
POISONING HOURS LATER.
>> Jenkins: IT WAS STRICTLY FROM
TOO MUCH ALCOHOL IN HIS SYSTEM,
THAT SHUT DOWN HIS-- HIS ORGANS.
>> Cooper: I ASSUME IT WOULD'VE
MADE A DIFFERENCE IF, WHEN HE
HAD FIRST PASSED OUT, SOMEBODY
HAD CALLED 911?
>> Jenkins: ABSOLUTELY.
>> Cooper: OR TAKEN HIM TO AN
EMERGENCY ROOM?
>> Jenkins: SURE.
I MEAN, HE WAS-- HE WAS ALIVE
TILL AROUND 4:00 OR 4:30 IN THE
MORNING.
ANY TIME BEFORE THEN, MORE THAN
LIKELY, HIS LIFE WOULD'VE BEEN
SAVED.
>> Cooper: A FRATERNITY MEMBER
DID FINALLY CALL 911, AT 8:30
A.M.
POLICE AND E.M.T.s FOUND SAM'S
BODY ON THE BASEMENT FLOOR.
HIS BLOOD ALCOHOL LEVEL WAS
NEARLY FIVE TIMES THE LEGAL
LIMIT.
>> YO, GET OUT OF THE ROOM, YOU
GUYS.
>> Coper: LATER, ACCORDING TO
POLICE, THE FRATERNITY'S STUDENT
PRESIDENT TOLD THEM HE GOT
ADVICE FROM A.T.O.'S NATIONAL
HEADQUARTERS THAT CHIEF JENKINS
SAID HAMPERED THE INVESTIGATION.
>> Jenkins: THE STUDENT
PRESIDENT OF THE FRATERNITY TOLD
US THAT THEY GOT WORD FROM
NATIONAL TO-- TO INSTRUCT ALL OF
THEIR MEMBERS TO DELETE ALL
THEIR SOCIAL MEDIA.
AND SO, THAT TELLS ME A LOT
ABOUT-- ABOUT THE NATIONAL
ORGANIZATION, WHETHER THEY'RE
REALLY INTERESTED IN THE TRUTH.
>> Cooper: DID THEY PREVENT
JUSTICE?
>> Jenkins: I THINK SO.
I THINK THERE WAS VERY LIKELY
INFORMATION THAT WOULD BE VERY
RELEVANT TO THE INVESTIGATION OF
SAM'S DEATH THAT WOULD'VE BEEN
IN SOCIAL MEDIA, THAT NOW WE'LL
NEVER KNOW.
>> Cooper: EIGHT MONTHS AFTER
SAM'S DEATH, HIS PARENTS FILED
SUIT AGAINST A.T.O., ITS
MEMBERS, AND WASHINGTON STATE
UNIVERSITY.
DOUG FIERBERG, THEIR ATTORNEY,
HAS LITIGATED MORE THAN 40
HAZING CASES DURING THE LAST TWO
DECADES.
>> Doug Fierberg: THIS IS AN
INDUSTRY THAT'S BEEN INVOLVED IN
THIS SORT OF MISCONDUCT FOR
DECADES.
>> Cooper: I DON'T THINK A LOT
OF PEOPLE THINK OF FRATERNITIES
AS AN INDUSTRY.
>> Fierberg: IT'S A NETWORK OF
ORGANIZATIONS THAT ARE THERE
TRYING TO SOLICIT MEMBERSHIP
FROM YOUNG PEOPLE WHO ARE AWAY
FROM HOME, OFTEN FOR THE FIRST
TIME, AND IT'S CLEARLY DESIGNED
TO MAKE MONEY, LIKE ANY OTHER
INDUSTRY.
>> Cooper: WHAT IS THE ROLE OF
FRATERNITY LEADERSHIP?
>> Fierberg: THEY HAVE COMPLETE
CONTROL, BUT ALSO PAIR THAT WITH
DENIABILITY.
BECAUSE, PRINCIPAL TO THEM IS
THIS IDEA THAT WHEN SOMEBODY
DIES-- AND THAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN-- OR WHEN SOMEBODY IS
SEXUALLY ASSAULTED-- AND THAT'S
GOING TO HAPPEN-- THAT THEY HAVE
SOME BLOCKADE BETWEEN THEM AND
THE VICTIM, IN TERMS OF
LIABILITY.
>> Wynn Smiley: MY PRIMARY GOAL,
WHEN SAM DIED, WAS TO FIND OUT
WHAT HAPPENED.
LIABILITY WAS THE LAST THING ON
MY MIND.
>> Cooper: WYNN SMILEY HAS BEEN
C.E.O. OF ALPHA TAU OMEGA'S
NATIONAL FRATERNITY ORGANIZATION
FOR 25 YEARS AND REPORTS TO A
BOARD OF DIRECTORS THAT HAS
AUTHORITY OVER ITS MULTIMILLION
DOLLAR BUDGET.
HE SAID THEY SET THE RULES FOR
A.T.O.'S 137 LOCAL CHAPTERS
NATIONWIDE, EDUCATE MEMBERS
AGGRESSIVELY ON THEIR POLICIES
BANNING HAZING AND UNDERAGE
DRINKING, AND HAVE THE POWER TO
SHUT LOCAL CHAPTERS DOWN.
AFTER SAM'S DEATH, WYNN SMILEY
FLEW TO WASHINGTON STATE
UNIVERSITY THE NEXT DAY.
>> Smiley: WE WANTED TO FIND OUT
WHO BROKE A.T.O. POLICY.
THEY KNOWINGLY DECIDED TO
PROVIDE ALCOHOL TO SAM, WHICH IS
A VIOLATION NOT ON-- ONLY OF OUR
ALCOHOL POLICY, BUT ALSO OF OUR
HAZING POLICY.
>> Cooper: WE UNDERSTAND YOU
CAME WITH AN "INSURANCE
ADJUSTER."
>> Smiley: I CAME WITH LINDA,
WHO IS A GREAT INVESTIGATOR.
SHE ACTS LIKE A MOTHER, AS IT
RELATES TO THEM FEELING--
FEELING COMFORTABLE WITH HER.
>> Cooper: IS SHE AN INSURANCE
ADJUSTER?
>> Smiley: SHE IS.
>> Cooper: DO YOU TURN OVER THE
RESULTS OF ANY INTERVIEWS YOU'VE
DONE WITH MEMBERS TO THE POLICE?
>> Smiley: DEPENDS ON THE
SITUATION.
>> Cooper: IN SAM'S DEATH, DID
YOU?
>> Smiley: I HA-- I-- I DON'T--
I DON'T RECALL, FRANKLY.
>> Cooper: IF YOU WANT TO BE
TRANSPARENT, YOU WOULD TURN OVER
THE RESULTS OF THOSE INTERVIEWS
TO THE POLICE, NO?
>> Smiley: WE WOULD HAVE
CERTAINLY PROVIDED THAT
INFORMATION, HAD WE-- HAD THE
POLICE ASKED.
>> Cooper: CHIEF JENKINS TOLD US
HIS OFFICERS WERE UNAWARE WYNN
SMILEY AND ALPHA TAU OMEGA'S
INSURANCE ADJUSTER WERE
CONDUCTING AN INVESTIGATION, AND
RECEIVED NO INFORMATION FROM
A.T.O. ABOUT WHAT MEMBERS TOLD
THEM.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE FRATERNITY
TOLD THE POLICE THAT, AND I'M
QUOTING, "NATIONAL'S A.T.O. HAD
TOLD THEM TO DELETE ALL THEIR
SOCIAL MEDIA."
>> Smiley: ANY TIME THE CHAPTER
IS IN A SITUATION WHERE IT HAS
KNOWINGLY VIOLATED A.T.O.
POLICY, AND WE KNOW THAT THERE'S
GOING TO BE NEWS COVERAGE, WE
ADVISE CHAPTERS TO TAKE DOWN
THEIR SOCIAL MEDIA.
WE DID NOT TELL THEM TO
"DELETE."
WE NEVER TELL ANYBODY DELETE--
DELETE ANYBODY'S SOCIAL MEDIA.
>> Cooper: DID YOU TELL MEMBERS
TO SAVE ALL OF THEIR
COMMUNICATIONS ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED THAT NIGHT, IN ORDER TO
GIVE IT TO POLICE?
>> Smiley: WE TOLD MEMBERS TO
COOPERATE FULLY WITH THE POLICE.
>> SO, IF YOU HAVE ANYTHING THAT
YOU WANT TO TELL US?
>> Cooper: BUT ACCORDING TO
CHIEF JENKINS, FRATERNITY
MEMBERS WERE NOT PARTICULARLY
COOPERATIVE.
>> Jenkins: WE DEFINITELY FOUND
THAT, WHEN INTERVIEWING
FRATERNITY MEMBERS, THAT THEY
WERE LESS THAN FORTHCOMING.
AND-- AND WE FOUND A LOT OF
CONFLICTS BETWEEN WHAT THEY TOLD
US AND WHAT OTHER PEOPLE TOLD
US, WHO KNEW WHAT WAS HAPPENING.
>> Cooper: SAM'S PARENTS SAY IT
WAS ONLY AFTER HIS DEATH THEY
LEARNED A.T.O. HAD A TROUBLED
PAST AT WASHINGTON STATE
UNIVERSITY.
IN 2013, W.S.U. PUT THE
FRATERNITY ON PROBATION FOR NINE
MONTHS BECAUSE OF ALCOHOL-
RELATED HAZING.
>> Houtz: PARENTS NEED TO SEE
THE TRACK RECORD, THE
DISCIPLINARY HISTORY OF THESE
FRATERNITIES, SO THAT, YOU KNOW,
WE CAN BE INFORMED.
>> Cooper: THEY COULD EASILY DO
THAT.
>> Houtz: I THINK SO.
>> Cooper: IN 2018, AFTER
ANOTHER COMPLAINT OF HAZING,
A.T.O.'S NATIONAL OFFICE STEPPED
IN AND REMOVED NEARLY HALF THE
CHAPTER'S MEMBERS-- SOME 30
STUDENTS-- THOUGH A.T.O. NEVER
DISCLOSED WHY.
DID YOU MAKE THAT INFORMATION
PUBLIC ANYWHERE?
>> Smiley: WE HAD THAT
CONVERSATION WITH THE MEMBERS,
IN TERMS OF WHY THEY'RE BEING
EXPELLED, AND THEY CAN CERTAINLY
SHARE THAT WITH WHOMEVER THEY
WANT.
>> Cooper: BUT YOU DON'T PUBLISH
INFORMATION ON YOUR WEBSITE
ABOUT WHAT YOU FIND.
WHY NOT BE UP-FRONT ABOUT WHAT
YOU ACTUALLY FOUND?
>> Smiley: WE'RE MOVING FORWARD
WITH THE MEN WHO ARE IN THE
CHAPTER, WHO WE BELIEVE--
>> Cooper: YOU PUT A LOT OF VERY
POSITIVE STUFF ABOUT A.T.O.
ON YOUR WEBSITE.
DON'T YOU ALSO OWE IT TO
POTENTIAL PLEDGES AND THEIR
PARENTS TO GIVE THEM INFORMATION
WHEN THEY'RE LOOKING AT YOUR
FRATERNITY?
>> Smiley: IF WE THOUGHT THAT
WOULD HELP, BUT WE DON'T
CONSIDER IT--
>> Cooper: WHY DON'T YOU THINK
THAT WOULD HELP?
>> Smiley: BECAUSE I DON'T THINK
THAT-- I DON'T THINK
UNDERGRADUATES LOOK AT WEBSITES.
AND I DON'T THINK--
>> Cooper: WAIT!
( LAUGHS )
WAIT A MINUTE.
YOU-- YOU "DON'T THINK
UNDERGRADUATES LOOK AT
WEBSITES"?
YOU KNOW THAT IF YOU PUT ALL
THIS INFORMATION ON YOUR
WEBSITE, IT MIGHT DISSUADE
PEOPLE FROM CHOOSING TO PLEDGE
YOUR FRATERNITY.
>> Smiley: THAT'S-- THAT'S NOT
WHY WE WOULDN'T PUT IT ON.
WE'RE CONSIDERING-- WE'RE
LOOKING AT THAT.
>> Cooper: WYNN SMILEY TOLD US
HE SUPPORTS EFFORTS TO INCREASE
CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR HAZING,
BUT DOESN'T BELIEVE HIS NATIONAL
ORGANIZATION HAS A DUTY TO
SUPERVISE ITS LOCAL CHAPTERS.
>> Smiley: THESE ARE SELF-
GOVERNING, INDEPENDENT
ORGANIZATIONS FOR A REASON.
>> Cooper: RIGHT.
BUT YOU-- YOU WANT THEM TO BE.
YOU ARE MAKING MONEY FROM THEM.
OU CAN SHUT THEM DOWN.
YOU CAN GO IN AND TELL THEM THAT
YOU'RE GOING TO DRUG-TEST.
YOU DO HAVE A SUPERVISORY
FUNCTION; YOU JUST ARE NOT
WANTING TO EMBRACE IT.
>> Smiley: AND IF WE THOUGHT
THAT THAT WOULD BE EFFECTIVE, WE
MAY CONSIDER THAT.
>> Cooper: YOU DON'T WANT ANY
ADULT SUPERVISION THAT'S
DIRECTLY LINKED TO YOU.
YOU DON'T FEEL THAT WOULD BE
BENEFICIAL.
>> Smiley: WE'RE NOT CONVINCED
THAT THAT WOULD NECESSARILY BE
BENEFICIAL.
>> Jenkins: I DON'T THINK THEY
COULD BE MORE WRONG.
I THINK HAVING AN ADULT THERE,
TO OVERSEE WHAT'S GOING ON AND
ENSURE THAT THEY ARE COMPLYING
WITH THEIR OWN HANDBOOK--
EVERYTHING THAT WAS GOING ON WAS
IN VIOLATION OF WHAT THEIR
HANDBOOK SAYS.
>> Houtz: THEY SET THEMSELVES UP
TO ENSURE THAT IF SOMETHING GOES
WRONG, THAT THEY CAN'T BE HELD
ACCOUNTABLE.
AND THEY'LL POINT TO THE ROGUE
FRATERNITY MEMBERS OR THEY'LL
POINT TO THE UNIVERSITY OR
THEY'LL POINT AT THE YOUNG DEAD
PLEDGE AND BLAME THEM, BUT IT'S
NEVER THEIR FAULT.
>> Cooper: DID THEY TRY TO BLAME
SAM?
>> Houtz: OH YEAH.
WHY WAS HE DRINKING THAT NIGHT?
IT'S-- THAT'S NOT WHAT WE DO
HERE.
>> Cooper: WYNN SMILEY SAYS SAM
MARTINEZ WASN'T BULLIED OR
PRESSURED INTO DRINKING THE
NIGHT HE DIED.
>> Smiley: WHEN PUSH COMES TO
SHOVE, THE PLEDGES CAN STAND UP
AND SAY, "NO."
>> Cooper: WAIT A MINUTE, WAIT A
MINUTE, COME ON.
>> Smiley: AND I DON'T WANT TO
PUT-- I DON'T WANT TO PUT THAT
ON THEM.
I DON'T WANT TO PUT THAT ON
THEM, BECAUSE THAT'S NOT FAIR.
I'M JUST SAYING THAT-
>> Cooper: BUT-- BUT COME ON.
YOU KNOW IF A PLEDGE SAYS, "THIS
IS RIDICULOUS.
I'M NOT GOING TO DRINK HOT
SAUCE, I'M NOT GOING TO DO, YOU
KNOW, SQUATS AGAINST THE WALL,
AND I'M NOT GOING TO DO 20 SHOTS
OF RUM," THEY WOULDN'T GET INTO
THE FRATERNITY.
>> Smiley: NO, AND I'M TELLING
YOU THEY WOULD.
>> Cooper: THIS IS THE SECOND-
BIGGEST NIGHT IN THE ENTIRE
PLEDGE PROCESS THAT SAM HAS
UNDERTAKEN.
>> Smiley: HE WAS PROVIDED THE
ALCOHOL, SHOULD NEVER HAVE BEEN
PROVIDED THE ALCOHOL--
>> Cooper: HE WASN'T "PROVIDED
THE ALCOHOL," LIKE SOMEBODY JUST
GOES AND GETS BEER FOR SOME KIDS
HANGING OUTSIDE A 7-ELEVEN.
HE WAS HANDED A-- NEARLY HALF A
GALLON OF RUM.
YOU'RE SAYING H-- IF HE HAD JUST
SAID, "YOU KNOW WHAT?
NO, THIS IS RIDICULOUS," THEY
WOULD'VE SAID, "GREAT.
YOU-- YOU CAN BE A MEMBER OF OUR
FRATERNITY.
THAT'S GREAT.
THAT SHOWS SPUNK ON YOUR PART."
YOU THINK THAT'S WHAT WOULD HAVE
HAPPENED?
>> Smiley: HAD HE SAID, "NO, I
DON'T WANT TO DRINK," I'M
CONFIDENT THAT HE WOULD NOT HAVE
HAD TO HAVE DRINKED.
>> Cooper: HE'D ALREADY HAD DATE
NIGHT.
ACTUALLY IT'S CALLED "BLACK-OUT
DATE NIGHT," I BELIEVE.
WHAT HAPPENS ON BLACK-OUT DATE
NIGHT?
>> Smiley: SO, WHOEVER ORGANIZED
THAT EVENT, FOR THE FRATERNITY,
AGAIN, DID SO OUTSIDE OF A.T.O.
POLICY.
AND PEOPLE WERE-- WERE CONNECTED
WITH DATES, OR THEY BROUGHT A
DATE--
>> Cooper: THEY WERE HANDCUFFED
TO DATES.
>> Smiley: SOME WERE.
AND--
>> Cooper: YEAH, WELL, HE WAS
HANDCUFFED TO A WOMAN, AND TOLD
TO DRINK-- I THINK IT WAS A
HALF-BOTTLE OF VODKA.
>> Smiley: AND SHOULD HAVE NEVER
BEEN PUT IN THAT POSITION.
>> Cooper: IN JULY, ALPHA TAU
OMEGA SETTLED THE LAWSUIT
BROUGHT BY SAM MARTINEZ' PARENTS
WITHOUT ADMITTING WRONGDOING.
WASHINGTON STATE UNIVERSITY
REMOVED ITS RECOGNITION OF THE
CHAPTER, AND THEN A.T.O.
REVOKED ITS CHARTER.
THE CHAPTER CAN SEEK
REINSTATEMENT IN 2026.
SEVEN FRATERNITY MEMBERS HAVE
BEEN SENTENCED TO BETWEEN ONE
AND 19 DAYS IN JAIL FOR SERVING
ALCOHOL TO MINORS.
SAM'S PARENTS ARE NOW WORKING
WITH STATE LEGISLATORS TO TRY TO
MAKE HAZING A FELONY.
>> Houtz: HE WAS THE BEAUTIFUL,
QUIRKY, FUNNY CENTER OF OUR
WORLD.
AND IT FELT LIKE THE EARTH JUST
FELL AWAY THE DAY THAT WE
LEARNED THE NEWS.
>> Cooper: WHAT DO YOU WANT TO
SEE HAPPEN?
>> Houtz: I DON'T WANT TO SEE
ANY MORE YOUNG MEN DIE.
( TICKING )
>> Lesley Stahl: WITH CLOSE TO A
MILLION SPECIES NOW THREATENED
WITH EXTINCTION, IT'S NOT OFTEN
YOU HEAR ABOUT A CONSERVATION
SUCCESS STORY, BUT THE MOUNTAIN
GORILLAS OF THE EAST AFRICAN
NATION OF RWANDA ARE JUST THAT.
WHEN AMERICAN NATURALIST DIAN
FOSSEY MOVED TO RWANDA HALF A
CENTURY AGO TO STUDY MOUNTAIN
GORILLAS, THEIR NUMBERS WERE
DWINDLING, DOWN TO JUST 254
INDIVIDUALS.
BUT TODAY THEY'RE UP TO OVER
600, WITH ANOTHER 400 IN
NEIGHBORING UGANDA-- THE ONLY
GREAT APE WHOSE NUMBERS ARE
ACTUALLY ON THE RISE.
HOW THEY'VE DONE IT?
A JOINT EFFORT BY SCIENTISTS AND
GOVERNMENT TO SAVE GORILLAS AND
HELP THE HUMAN COMMUNITIES
AROUND THEM, WITH A KEY ROLE
PLAYED... BY TOURISTS.
THESE ARE THE VIRUNGA VOLCANOES,
HOME TO MOST OF THE WORLD'S
MOUNTAIN GORILLAS.
DIAN FOSSEY APTLY CALLED THEM
GORILLAS IN THE MIST.
BUT WHEN THE MIST LIFTS...
THEY ARE GORILLAS IN THE SUN,
DOING WHAT MOUNTAIN GORILLAS
DO... EAT... REST... EAT SOME
MORE... AND SNUGGLE.
>> Tara Stoinski: WHEN YOU LOOK
IN THE EYES OF A GORILLA, YOU
SEE A KINDRED SPIRIT LOOKING
BACK AT YOU.
THEY ARE SO MUCH LIKE US.
THEY HAVE FRIENDS, THEY HAVE
ENEMIES.
THEY LOVE TO PLAY.
THEY LOVE TO EAT.
THEY LOVE TO NAP.
THEY ARE INCREDIBLE MOMS AND
INCREDIBLE DADS.
>> Stoinski: SO, WE'RE GOING TO
PULL THIS ONE OUT.
>> Stahl: PRIMATOLOGIST TARA
STOINSKI HEADS THE DIAN FOSSEY
GORILLA FUND, A NON-PROFIT
RESEARCH AND CONSERVATION
ORGANIZATION THAT GREW OUT OF
FOSSEY'S WORK.
HOW MANY YEARS DID SHE LIVE UP
HERE ALONE?
>> Stoinski: SHE WAS IN THE
FOREST FOR 18 YEARS.
>> Stahl: FOSSEY WAS SENT TO
RWANDA IN 1967 BY FAMED
ANTHROPOLOGIST LOUIS LEAKEY, WHO
HAD ALSO SENT JANE GOODALL TO
TANZANIA TO STUDY CHIMPS.
>> Stoinski: THE PEOPLE IN THE
REGION, THEY GAVE HER A
NICKNAME: NYIRAMACIBIRI, WHICH
MEANT "WOMAN THAT LIVES ALONE IN
THE FOREST."
I'M SURE THEY WONDERED, LIKE,
WHAT WAS SHE DOING UP THERE?
>> Stahl: STRANGE WOMAN LIVING
UP--
>> Stoinski: STRANGE WOMAN.
>> Stahl: --IN THE MOUNT--
>> Stoinski: AND VERY TALL.
SHE WAS 6'.
THIS IS ACTUALLY FROM 1969.
>> Stahl: WHAT SHE WAS DOING, AS
STOINSKI SHOWED US, WAS
OBSERVING GORILLAS FOR HOURS A
DAY.
>> Stoinski: WHAT SHE WOULD DO
EACH NIGHT IS COME BACK AND TYPE
UP ALL OF HER NOTES.
>> Stahl: "THERE IS SOME SOFT
PIG GRUNTING HEARD FROM THE
SILVERBACK, AND GAS IS
RELEASED."
( LAUGHS )
AND THIS JUST GOES ON AND--
>> Stoinski: ON AND ON, YEAH.
>> Stahl: ON AND ON?
FOSSEY'S RESEARCH-- AND HER
APPEARANCES IN "NATIONAL
GEOGRAPHIC"-- HELPED CHANGE THE
PERCEPTION OF GORILLAS FROM
AGGRESSIVE, KING KONG BRUTES, TO
THE GENTLE VEGETARIAN GIANTS
THEY ACTUALLY ARE.
BUT GORILLAS BACK THEN WERE
UNDER ASSAULT.
WHY WERE THERE POACHERS?
WHY WERE PEOPLE INTERESTED?
>> Stoinski: WELL, AT THE TIME,
PEOPLE UNFORTUNATELY WANTED
PARTS OF GORILLAS AS TROPHIES.
SO THEY WANTED A GORILLA HEAD
FOR THEIR MANTELPIECE, OR A-- A
GORILLA HAND.
>> Stahl: THE GORILLAS' HABITAT
WAS ALSO BEING EATEN AWAY, AS
THOUSANDS OF ACRES OF FOREST
WERE CUT DOWN SO FARMERS COULD
PLANT CASH CROPS UP THE
MOUNTAINSIDE.
THE DEMARCATION LINE BETWEEN
FARMLAND AND FOREST STANDS OUT
LIKE A BAD HAIRCUT, SHOWING HOW
LITTLE LAND GORILLAS HAVE LEFT.
WE CUT DOWN THEIR HOMES.
>> Stoinski: YEAH, I MEAN,
UNFORTUNATELY, THAT'S THE STORY
FOR WILDLIFE AROUND THE WORLD.
>> Stahl: BUT HERE, THAT STORY
IS GETTING A REWRITE, AND THE
NEW VERSION STARTS AT VOLCANOES
NATIONAL PARK HEADQUARTERS EVERY
MORNING, WHERE TOURISTS GATHER
TO TREK TO SEE GORILLAS, LED BY
EXPERT GUIDES.
>> THEY CAN LIVE UP TO 45 YEARS.
>> Stahl: THE RWANDAN GOVERNMENT
REGULATES THE VISITS-- NO MORE
THAN EIGHT PEOPLE PER GROUP, FOR
JUST ONE HOUR WITH THE GORILLAS,
WITH PRECAUTIONS TAKEN TO
PROTECT THEM FROM HUMAN ILLNESS.
THE PRICE TAG IS STEEP-- $1,500
PER PERSON-- TURNING RWANDA, A
COUNTRY KNOWN FOR ITS HORRIFIC
1994 GENOCIDE, NOT SO MUCH FOR
ITS BEAUTIFUL SCENERY, INTO A
PRIME DESTINATION FOR THE
WEALTHY.
SOME OF THE MOST LUXURIOUS
HOTELS IN THE WORLD HAVE OPENED
HERE, GENERATING TENS OF
MILLIONS IN TOURISM REVENUE.
OTHER COUNTRIES HAVE DIAMONDS,
OIL.
WOULD YOU SAY THAT GORILLAS ARE
THE MOST IMPORTANT NATURAL
RESOURCE OF THIS WHOLE COUNTRY?
>> Stoinski: DEFINITELY.
DEFINITELY--
>> Stahl: DEFINITELY?
>> Stoinski: YEAH.
IT'S ONE OF IF NOT THE TOP
SOURCE OF FOREIGN REVENUE, IS
TOURISM TO SEE THE GORILLAS.
>> Stahl: FOR THE WHOLE COUNTRY?
>> Stoinski: FOR THE WHOLE
COUNTRY.
>> Stahl: THE GOVERNMENT GIVES
10% OF THE MONEY FROM THOSE
GORILLA TREKS TO DISTRICTS THAT
BORDER NATIONAL PARKS, IN A
PROGRAM CALLED TOURISM REVENUE
SHARING.
>> Prosper Uwingeli: AS YOU SEE
THIS SCHOOL BEHIND, THAT WAS
BEFORE.
>> Stahl: CHIEF PARK WARDEN
PROSPER UWINGELI MET US AT A
LOCAL PRIMARY SCHOOL.
BEHIND HIM WAS THE OLD SCHOOL.
BEHIND ME...
>> Uwingeli: LOOK AT THE
WINDOWS.
>> Stahl: NEW CLASSROOMS PAID
FOR BY TOURISM REVENUE SHARING
FUNDS.
IT COSTS $1,500
>> Uwingeli: YES.
>> Stahl: TO GO SEE THE GORILLAS
FOR ONE HOUR.
>> Uwingeli: FOR ONE HOUR.
SPECIAL EXPERIENCE.
>> Stahl: HE ADMITS IT'S A LOT,
BUT SAYS IT'S MADE A TREMENDOUS
DIFFERENCE IN HIS MEETINGS WITH
LOCAL LEADERS.
>> Uwingeli: WE GO THERE AND WE
LISTEN WHAT COMMUNITIES WANT THE
TOURISM REVENUE SHARING TO-- TO
SUPPORT.
>> Stahl: THEY DECIDE?
>> Uwingeli: YEAH, THEY DECIDE.
>> Stahl: THIS VILLAGE BUILT A
HEALTH CENTER.
THIS ONE NEW HOUSING WITH WATER
TANKS AND ELECTRICITY.
HERE, A NEW MARKETPLACE.
THE 10% GIVES COMMUNITIES UP TO
650,000 U.S. DOLLARS A YEAR.
>> GOOD MORNING, GOOD MORNING.
>> Stahl: UWINGELI DIVIDES HIS
TIME BETWEEN GREETING TOURISTS,
MANAGING HIS RANGERS, AND
TRAVELING AROUND THESE VILLAGES,
TALKING, CAJOLING, AND
CELEBRATING WHAT TOURISM REVENUE
HAS ACHIEVED.
( CLAPPING )
A FEW YEARS BACK, THIS COMMUNITY
CHOSE TO GET MILKING COWS, WHICH
HAVE SINCE HAD CALVES.
SO, THE COWS ARE NOW BEING GIVEN
TO NEW NEEDY FAMILIES.
♪ ♪ ♪
AND THOSE COLORFUL STRIPED
SWEATERS?
THEY'RE A PRODUCT OF TOURISM
REVENUE SHARING, TOO.
ONE YEAR THIS COMMUNITY USED ITS
FUNDS TO BUY KNITTING MACHINES.
A LOT OF THE GUIDES, PORTERS
COME FROM THESE COMMUNITIES--
>> Stoinski: --FROM THESE
COMMUNITIES.
AND SOME OF THEM ARE FORMER
POACHERS THEMSELVES.
>> Stahl: NO?
>> Stoinski: YEAH.
>> Stahl: SOME OF THE PORTERS
AND GUIDES?
>> Stoinski: YEAH.
>> Stahl: WERE POACHERS?
>> Stoinski: OR COME FROM
POACHER FAMILIES.
>> Stahl: SO, HAS ALL POACHING
OF GORILLAS STOPPED?
>> Uwingeli: YEAH.
IN RWANDA, YES.
CONFIDENTLY, YES.
>> Stahl: BUT GORILLAS CAN STILL
GET CAUGHT IN SNARES SET FOR
SMALLER ANIMALS LIKE ANTELOPES,
SO THE FOSSEY FUND DISPATCHES A
SMALL ARMY OF TRACKERS EVERY
MORNING, 365 DAYS A YEAR.
>> Stoinski: WE GO OUT INTO THE
FOREST.
WE KNOW EVERY GORILLA IN ALL OF
THE FAMILIES THAT WE MONITOR.
WE CHECK AND MAKE SURE EVERY ONE
OF THEM IS OKAY.
IF ONE LOOKS ILL, WE'LL NOTIFY
THE VETERINARIANS.
AND WE CALL THIS EXTREME
CONSERVATION.
>> Stahl: IT COULD ALSO BE
CALLED AN EXTREME WORKOUT.
OH, BOY.
WE SET OFF ON A GORILLA TREK
WITH STOINSKI, UWINGELI AND A
TEAM OF PORTERS.
VISITING MOUNTAIN GORILLAS IS NO
WALK IN THE PARK.
IT'S AN UPHILL HIKE FOR MORE
TAN AN HOUR AT AN ALTITUDE OF
8,000 FEET, THROUGH THAT
FARMLAND THAT ONCE BELONGED TO
THE GORILLAS.
CAN WE STOP HERE?
JUST TO GET TO THE PARK.
ARE YOU OUT OF BREATH?
>> Stoinski: YES.
( LAUGHS )
>> Stahl: OR IS IT JUST ME?
THEN, JUST AS WE REACHED THE
PARK BORDER...
( GASP )
OH, MY GOODNESS GRACIOUS, I
CAN'T BELIEVE THIS.
A SILVERBACK, USED TO SEEING
TOURISTS, SAT CALMLY EATING.
HE'S RIGHT HERE.
>> YEAH, COME, COME.
>> Stahl: UNFAZED BY OUR GAWKING
AND POINTING.
UWINGELI TOLD US HE'S AN ADULT
MALE NAMED LISANGA.
FOSSEY FUND COUNTRY DIRECTOR
FELIX NDAGIJIMANA TAUGHT US HOW
TO SIGNAL THAT WE COME IN PEACE.
( GORILLA SOUND )
>> Ndagijimana: OH, THAT'S VERY
GOOD.
>> Stahl: INSIDE THE PARK, AFTER
MORE CLIMBING.
>> Stoinski: LOOK, LESLEY, LOOK.
LESLEY--
>> Stahl: OH, LOOK AT THE BABY.
OH, MY GOODNESS.
WE FOUND THE REST OF LISANGA'S
GROUP.
>> Uwingeli: LET'S FOLLOW THEM.
>> Stahl: UWINGELI TOLD US THE
DOMINANT SILVERBACK WAS HEADING
HIGHER UP THE MOUNTAIN, SO THE
WHOLE GROUP WAS FOLLOWING.
AND SO WERE WE.
IN A SIGN OF THE POPULATION'S
HEALTH, THIS GROUP HAS FIVE
INFANTS, AND SEVERAL JUVENILES.
OH, MY GOODNESS, THEY'RE--
>> Stoinski: YEAH, THEY'RE
HAVING A BALL.
>> Stahl: THAT'S SERIOUS.
>> Stoinski: THEY'RE HAVING A
BALL.
>> Stahl: SHE TOLD US THEY PLAY
FOR FUN-- AND TO PRACTICE
FIGHTING.
OR PERHAPS, JUST TO SHOW US
WHO'S BOSS.
NEAR US IN THE FOREST, IT
SOUNDED LIKE A SILVERBACK PHOTO
SHOOT WAS GOING ON.
BUT FOSSEY FUND RESEARCH
ASSISTANT NADIA NIYONIZEYE
WASN'T SNAPPING ORDINARY
PICTURES.
SHE WAS USING A TECHNIQUE CALLED
PHOTOGRAMMETRY TO GET BETTER
MEASUREMENTS OF GORILLA SIZE.
>> Nadia Niyonizeye: THERE ARE
FOUR CENTIMETER IN BETWEEN EACH.
>> Stahl: BY BEAMING LASERS ONTO
THE GORILLA'S BODY AND HEAD,
WHICH IT DOESN'T FEEL.
>> Stahl: OH, I SEE IT.
BACK AT THE OFFICE, SHE USES THE
DOTS TO MAKE PRECISE
CALCULATIONS OF THEIR SIZE.
SCIENCE REMAINS THE HEART OF THE
FOSSEY FUND'S MISSION.
THEY HAVE THE LARGEST COLLECTION
ANYWHERE OF GORILLA SKELETONS,
WHERE SCIENTISTS FROM AROUND THE
WORLD COME TO DO RESEARCH.
>> Stoinski: JUST SORT OF TAKING
PIECES OUT AND PULLING IT LIKE
THAT.
>> Stahl: AND A GORILLA POOP
LAB.
YOU GATHER THEIR POOP?
>> Stoinski: IT'S LIKE A
TREASURE TROVE OF INFORMATION
FOR US.
>> Stahl: TO STUDY STRESS
HORMONES AND DO D.N.A. AND
PATERNITY TESTING.
BUT STOINSKI SAYS THEY'RE
RUNNING OUT OF SPACE, SO THEY'RE
CONSTRUCTING A NEW, MULTI-
BUILDING GREEN CAMPUS WITH
INITIAL FUNDING FROM ELLEN
DEGENERES.
SET TO OPEN NEXT YEAR, IT'LL
CELEBRATE THE PROGRESS MADE IN
SAVING MOUNTAIN GORILLAS-- WITH
PLENTY OF SPACE FOR RESEARCHERS,
EXHIBITS FOR TOURISTS AND PEOPLE
FROM LOCAL COMMUNITIES-- AND
VIEWS OF THE VOLCANOES.
AND YOU CAN SEE THE MIST.
>> Stoinski: IT REALLY ROLLS IN.
>> Stahl: THE BUILDING PROCESS
ITSELF REINFORCES THE FUND'S
MOTTO: "HELPING PEOPLE SAVING
GORILLAS."
IT'S EMPLOYING MORE THAN 1,500
LOCAL WORKERS, MORE THAN 20% OF
THEM WOMEN.
ONE EXHIBIT ON DISPLAY HERE WILL
TEACH VISITORS TO SPEAK LIKE A
GORILLA.
>> Stoinski: WE CAN PLAY IT.
>> WELCOME TO GORILLA CHAT.
>> Stoinski: YOU CAN HEAR.
>> WE'RE HAPPY THAT YOU WANT TO
LEARN TO SPEAK LIKE A GORILLA.
>> Stahl: IT PLAYS GORILLA
VOCALIZATIONS SOMEWHAT
COMPARABLE TO HUMAN ONES.
( GORILLA LAUGHING SOUND )
>> Stahl: YES, GORILLAS LAUGH.
>> Stoinski: ISN'T THAT GREAT?
SO, THE IDEA IS THAT YOU HAVE TO
TRY AND MIMIC IT.
>> Stahl: THAT'S IMPOSSIBLE.
SHE GAVE ME ONE SHE SAID WAS
SIMPLE.
( GORILLA NOISE )
>> Stoinski: SO, THIS IS THE PIG
GRUNT.
>> Stahl: WHAT DOES IT MEAN?
>> Stoinski: IT'S KIND OF LIKE A
MILD WARNING.
THE SORT OF HUMAN VERSION IS,
"UNH-UNH-UNH."
>> Stahl: YOU'RE ON THIN ICE.
>> Stoinski: YOU WANT TO TRY IT
WITH ME RECORDING AND SEE?
>> Stahl: YEAH.
>> Stoinski: OKAY.
( BEEPS )
>> Stahl: ( GRUNTS )
( LAUGHTER )
"TRY AGAIN--"
>> Stoinski: AGAIN.
( LAUGHS )
>> Stahl: I DID SUCH A BAD JOB.
>> Stoinski: IT'S HARD.
>> Stahl: SO FUN.
>> Stoinski: WON'T IT BE FUN,
THOUGH?
>> Stahl: STOINSKI WANTS SCHOOL
KIDS TO COME, AND BE INSPIRED TO
SOLVE THE NEXT SET OF PROBLEMS--
INCREASING NUMBERS OF GORILLAS
INHABITING A FIXED AMOUNT OF
SPACE.
>> Stoinski: AS THE POPULATION
HAS INCREASED, BUT THE HABITAT
HASN'T, IT IS PUTTING MORE
PRESSURE ON THE GORILLAS.
AND SO THE GOVERNMENT IS LOOKING
TO TRY AND EXPAND THE PARK SO
THAT THERE WILL BE MORE SPACE SO
THAT POPULATION CAN CONTINUE TO
GROW.
>> Stahl: THERE ARE PLANS TO
EXPAND THE PARK BY 23%, AND
RELOCATE COMMUNITIES TO WHAT THE
GOVERNMENT CALLS MODEL VILLAGES
LIKE THIS ONE, WITH ELECTRICITY
AND BRAND-NEW SCHOOLS, TRYING TO
MAKE PARK EXPANSION ANOTHER WIN-
WIN FOR GORILLAS AND THEIR HUMAN
NEIGHBORS.
IT'S A SUCCESS STORY.
>> Stoinski: IT IS A SUCCESS
STORY, DEFINITELY, BUT WE SAY
IT'S A FRAGILE SUCCESS BECAUSE
THERE ARE SO FEW OF THEM LEFT
AND THERE ARE STILL SO MANY
THREATS.
>> Stahl: BUT FOR NOW, THE NEWS
IS GOOD.
SO FAR THIS YEAR, 24 NEW BABY
GORILLAS HAVE BEEN BORN HERE.
>> Uwingeli: WOW, I MEAN, YOU
CAN'T HAVE ENOUGH OF TELLING
THOSE STORIES OF GORILLAS-- WHEN
YOU LOOK AT THE MOMS CARRYING
THE BABIES--
>> Stahl: DO YOU KNOW THAT WHEN
YOU TALK ABOUT GORILLAS, YOUR
FACE COMPLETELY LIGHTS UP?
>> Uwingeli: I KNOW ABOUT IT,
BUT MUCH OF THE SMILE COMES FROM
WHAT THEY'RE HELPING US TO
ACHIEVE.
THAT'S REALLY THE BEST WAY WE
CAN SERVE THE NEXT GENERATION OF
KIDS, GORILLAS.
>> Stahl: OH, MY GOODNESS!
>> Uwingeli: ...AND-- AND-- AND
PEOPLE.
( TICKING )
>> Bill Whitaker: RITA MORENO IS
BEST KNOWN AS ANITA IN THE MOVIE
"WEST SIDE STORY."
THE 1961 MUSICAL BROKE BOX
OFFICE RECORDS AND WON TEN
OSCARS, INCLUDING BEST PICTURE
AND FOR MORENO, BEST SUPPORTING
ACTRESS.
NOT TOO SHABBY FOR A KID FROM
PUERTO RICO WHO ARRIVED IN NEW
YORK WITH NOTHING.
SHE SAYS HER SHOWBIZ LONGEVITY
IS SPRINKLED WITH SERENDIPITY
BUT WE WARN YOU, BENEATH THE
GOLD PLATE OF HER OSCAR THERE IS
A DARK HOLLYWOOD TALE OF PAIN
AND BETRAYAL, REINVENTION AND
RESILIENCE.
SHE'S ONLY THE THIRD ACTOR TO
"EGOT," WINNING THE EMMY,
GRAMMY, OSCAR AND TONY.
AND AS MORENO APPROACHES 90 WITH
A NEW "WEST SIDE STORY" COMING
OUT, WE FOUND AN ARTIST WHO IS
WITTY AND CANDID.
READY IF YOU ARE?
>> Rita Moreno: YESSS.
YOU WANT ME TO SLATE MYSELF?
>> Whitaker: YES, PLEASE
>> Moreno: RIGHT.
RITA MORENO WITH ONE OF THE
WORLD'S HANDSOMEST MEN OF COLOR.
EVER.
>> Whitaker: OKAY, INTERVIEW
OVER.
>> Moreno: WE'RE DONE.
>> Whitaker: CAN'T DO ANY BETTER
THAN THAT.
OKAY, I JUST WANT TO ASK YOU
ABOUT THE OBVIOUS, ALL OF YOUR
HONORS AND AWARDS.
>> Moreno: AIN'T IT GRAND?
THERE'S REALLY A LOT OF STUFF
HERE.
>> Whitaker: BECAUSE YOU'VE DONE
A LOT OF STUFF.
>> Moreno: EVERY ONE OF THEM
SURPRISE THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS
OUT OF ME.
BUT IT'S NOT ABOUT THE AWARDS.
DON'T LET THAT SOUND LIKE I'M
BEING MODEST.
I AM NOT MODEST.
I KNOW WHAT I HAVE EARNED.
I'M UP TO MY ASS IN SOME PRETTY
SPECTACULAR ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
BUT THAT'S NOT WHAT A CAREER IS.
A CAREER IS WORKING.
♪ ♪ ♪
>> Whittaker: AND RITA MORENO
WILL BE THE FIRST TO SAY NONE OF
IT CAME EASY.
WHAT FUELED THAT FLAWLESS SWIRL
OF VIOLET AS ANITA IN "WEST SIDE
STORY" WAS SHEER WILLPOWER.
>> Moreno: I NEVER STOPPED
REHEARSING.
IN FACT, SOMEBODY TOLD ME
RECENTLY THAT THEY WERE A DANCE
EXTRA ON THE MAMBO AT THE GYM
SCENE.
AND ONE OF THE GIRLS TURNED TO
HER WHEN WE HAD TEN MINUTES OFF,
AND SHE SAYS, "LOOK AT RITA
MORENO.
SHE'S STILL REHEARSING."
SHE SAYS, "THAT'S WHAT YOU HAVE
TO DO TO BECOME A STAR."
>> Whitaker: BUT WHAT IS IT
ABOUT YOU TO HAVE ACHIEVED THIS?
>> Moreno: I THINK THAT
PERSEVERANCE IS MY MIDDLE NAME.
IT'S JUST SOMETHING-- TRULY,
THAT I THINK I INHERITED FROM MY
MOM.
>> Whitaker: IN 1936, MORENO'S
MOTHER, ROSA MARIA, AND WIDE-
EYED FIVE-YEAR-OLD ROSITA, FLED
POVERTY IN PUERTO RICO TO START
A NEW LIFE IN NEW YORK.
THEY LANDED IN THE BRONX.
>> Moreno: OR AS WE STILL CALL
IT "THE BRONG."
>> Whitaker: HERE SHE FIRST
ENCOUNTERED THE STING OF RACISM.
>> Moreno: I WAS BEING CALLED
WORDS LIKE, "SPIC."
THE TROUBLE WITH THAT IS THAT
YOU GROW UP BELIEVING THAT YOU
DON'T HAVE ANY VALUE.
>> Whitaker: YOU GREW UP
THINKING YOU DIDN'T HAVE VALUE?
>> Moreno: OH, I GREW UP FILLED
WITH SELF-LOATHING BECAUSE I WAS
A PUERTO RICAN.
WHEN YOU'RE LITTLE, YOU'RE TOLD
YOU'RE NOT WORTH ANYTHING, YOU
BELIEVE IT.
>> Whitaker: SHE FOUND SANCTUARY
AND HER PASSION IN A SPANISH
DANCE STUDIO, AND BY 17,
MORENO'S DRAMATIC LOOKS AND
FLAIR CAUGHT THE EYE OF A TALENT
SCOUT, WHO GOT HER A MEETING
WITH NONE OTHER THAN MGM'S
STUDIO CHIEF, LOUIS B. MAYER.
>> Moreno: AND HE SAID, "YOUNG
LADY, HOW WOULD YOU LIKE OTHER
BE UNDER CONTRACT TO MGM
STUDIOS?"
>> Whitaker: JUST LIKE THAT?
>> Moreno: JUST LIKE THAT.
>> Whitaker: WITHOUT SO MUCH AS
A SCREEN TEST, IN 1950, RITA
MORENO FOUND HERSELF MAKING
MOVIES IN HOLLYWOOD.
>> Moreno: I WENT TO THE
COMMISSARY FOR THE VERY FIRST
TIME, AND THAT VERY DAY, IN
WALKS ELIZABETH TAYLOR AND LANA
TURNER.
I THOUGHT I WOULD HAVE A HEART
ATTACK.
>> Whitaker: YOU, LITTLE ROSITA,
HAD ARRIVED.
>> Moreno: AND I REALLY FELT
LIKE ONE OF THEM.
>> Whitaker: BUT WITH THE
HOLLYWOOD GLAMOUR CAME STUDIO
OBLIGATIONS: PUBLICITY DATES FOR
PAPARAZZI AND SWANK PARTIES
WHERE THE TEENAGED STARLET FOUND
HERSELF FIGHTING OFF INSISTENT
SEXUAL HARASSMENT FROM POWERFUL
MEN.
>> Moreno: IT WRENCHES MY HEART,
MOSTLY THAT I DIDN'T KNOW HOW TO
HANDLE THAT KIND OF THING.
>> Whitaker: WHY WOULD YOU BE
EXPECTED TO?
I MEAN THAT'S--
>> Moreno: WELL, IT WAS VERY
COMMON.
THE CASTING COUCH THERE WERE A
MILLION JOKES ABOUT THAT.
>> Whitaker: BUT RITA MORENO
KNEW IT WAS NOTHING TO LAUGH
ABOUT.
>> Moreno: I WAS RAPED BY MY
AGENT WHEN I WAS-- I WAS EITHER
16 OR 17.
I WAS SITTING ON THE COUCH NEXT
TO HIM AND HE SAID, "SUCH A
PRETTY GIRL," AND HE PUT HIS
HAND ON MY CHEEK.
AND MOUNTED ME.
I STRUGGLED, BUT HE DID IT ALL.
>> Whitaker: SHE TOLD US SHE WAS
THE FAMILY'S BREADWINNER AND HAD
TO KEEP WORKING, SO THE INSECURE
RITA MORENO FELT SHE HAD NO
CHOICE BUT TO KEEP HER AGENT.
>> Whitaker: IS THIS THE SOURCE
OF THE INSECURITY?
>> Moreno: OH, IS THIS AT THE
BOTTOM OF ALL THE INSECURITY?
NO QUESTION.
>> Whitaker: WHY ARE YOU
COMFORTABLE SPEAKING OUT?
>> Moreno: I WANT WOMEN TO KNOW
THAT ALL THE AWARDS IN THE
WORLD, WILL NEVER MAKE UP FOR
THE THINGS I HAVE EXPERIENCED IN
MY LIFE.
THE BE-ALL AND END-ALL IS
RESPECT AND SELF-RESPECT WHICH
TOOK ME A LONG TIME TO EARN.
>> Whitaker: HOLLYWOOD CAN BE
HARD ON WOMEN, BUT FOR A WOMAN
OF COLOR IN THE 1950S, IT COULD
BE CORROSIVE.
♪ I'M RIGHT HERE ♪
>> Whitaker: MORENO GOT ROLES AS
NATIVE GIRLS IN B-MUSICALS,
CAKED IN BROWN MAKEUP, ALL WITH
A VAGUELY SPANISH ACCENT.
♪ THAT IS TRUE ♪
>> Moreno: DUSKY MAIDENS.
>> Whitaker: THOSE WERE THE
TYPES OF ROLES YOU WERE GETTING?
>> Moreno: WITH THE ACCENT.
IT HURTS ME TO WATCH ME DOING
STUFF THAT IS HUMILIATING.
>> Whitaker: YOU WERE WORKING
BECAUSE OF THESE ROLES.
>> Moreno: I ACCEPTED A LOT OF
THOSE, BECAUSE THERE WAS NOTHING
ELSE.
AND I TOOK THEM WITH A LOT OF
SHAME.
>> WHAT DID I TELL YOU, LENA?
>> Whitaker: BUT SHE TAKES GREAT
PRIDE IN THREE SCENES IN AN MGM
BLOCKBUSTER.
>> Moreno: "SINGIN' IN THE RAIN"
WHERE I HAD A VERY TINY PART.
( CHEERS )
>> Whitaker: SHE PLAYED FAMOUS
FLAPPER, ZELDA ZANDERS, FINALLY
ABLE TO STRUT HER STUFF AND SHOW
HER TRUE FACE.
>> Moreno: IT WAS WONDERFUL
BECAUSE I DIDN'T NEED TO PUT ON
THAT MUDDY BROWN MAKEUP.
I DIDN'T HAVE TO SPEAK WITH AN
ACCENT.
AND I THOUGHT, "THAT'S GOING TO
CHANGE EVERYTHING."
>> Whitaker: INSTEAD, SHE WAS
DROPPED BY MGM.
SHE FOUND WORK WITH OTHER
STUDIOS.
AND THAT SMOLDERING PASSION TO
PERFORM LANDED HER, LIKE A
BOMBSHELL, ON THE COVER OF "LIFE
MAGAZINE" IN 1954.
THAT PICTURE WON HER A NEW
STUDIO CONTRACT AND THE
ATTENTION OF ONE OF THE GREATEST
ACTORS OF AN ERA.
>> Moreno: MARLON BRANDO.
MARLON TOOK ONE LOOK AND HE JUST
FELL.
>> Whitaker: HE FELL?
>> Moreno: FOR ME.
>> Whitaker: YEAH.
>> Moreno: I HAD A FOX CONTRACT.
I MET THE LOVE OF MY LIFE.
ALL WAS GOOD.
WHAT COULD BE BAD?
>> Whitaker: MARLON BRANDO TAKES
UP THREE CHAPTERS OF MORENO'S
MEMOIR AND EIGHT YEARS OF HER
LIFE.
THEIR STORMY RELATIONSHIP NEARLY
KILLED HER.
BRANDO WAS MARRIED WHEN MORENO
BECAME PREGNANT WITH HIS CHILD.
SHE SAYS HE PRESSURED HER TO
HAVE AN ABORTION.
AFTERWARD, SHE ATTEMPTED
SUICIDE.
WHY DID YOU TRY TO TAKE YOUR
LIFE?
>> Moreno: WHAT I WAS REALLY
TRYING TO DO WAS KILL THAT BAD
SIDE OF ME THAT KEPT GOING BACK
TO HIM.
THAT BAD WOMAN WHO DIDN'T
RESPECT ME, WHO WAS ME, ANOTHER
SIDE OF ME.
>> Whitaker: WELL, THANK GOD YOU
FAILED.
>> Moreno: YOU'RE NOT KIDDING.
>> Whitaker: SIX MONTHS LATER,
IN THE FALL OF 1961, PEOPLE
AROUND THE WORLD GOT TO SEE HER
PLAYING ANITA IN ONE OF THE
GREATEST MUSICAL FILMS OF ALL
TIME.
>> Moreno: I WANTED THAT PART SO
BADLY.
>> Whitaker: WHY?
WHAT WAS IT ABOUT ANITA THAT
MADE YOU WANT IT SO MUCH?
>> Moreno: OH!
IT WAS THE PART FOR A HISPANIC
GIRL.
♪ ♪ ♪
♪ PUERTO RICO MY HEART'S
DEVOTION ♪
>> Moreno: ANITA, THE ONE WHO
HAD A SENSE OF HERSELF.
A SENSE OF DIGNITY.
AND I HAD TO PORTRAY THAT.
AND IT FELT REALLY GOOD.
>> Whitaker: WELL, YOU TALK
ABOUT YOURSELF LIKE YOU'RE THIS
BUNDLE OF INSECURITIES AND
EVERYTHING, BUT WHAT YOU PUT ON
THAT SCREEN, WAS ANYTHING BUT.
>> Moreno: I COULD PRETEND I HAD
SELF-RESPECT.
I'M AN ACTRESS.
♪ ♪ ♪
HER PERFORMANCE WAS ELECTRIFYING
AND, SHE SAYS, ONE OF THE
HARDEST THINGS SHE'S EVER DONE.
>> Moreno: I HADN'T DANCED IN
YEARS.
AND I DIDN'T DANCE THOSE KIND OF
DANCES.
THAT'S CALLED JAZZ.
I NEVER WAS THAT-- I WAS A
SPANISH DANCER.
CASTANETS.
SO, WHEN I WENT INTO WEST SIDE
STORY, I HAD MY WORK CUT OUT FOR
ME.
>> Whitaker: HER MOST POWERFUL
SCENE REQUIRED HER TO DIG DOWN
INTO FEELINGS SHE'D LONG TRIED
TO BURY.
>> Moreno: WHEN WE DID THE RAPE
SCENE DURING REHEARSALS WHEN
THEY WERE MAULING ME AND ALL
THAT, THE BOYS.
I PUSHED THEM AWAY, AND STARTED
TO CRY, AND I COULD NOT STOP.
ALL OF THOSE SCARS THAT I
THOUGHT WERE HEALED JUST OPENED
UP.
>> Moreno: I WAS LIKE A WOUNDED
ANIMAL WHEN I DID IT AGAIN.
>> Whitaker: IS THAT ON THE
SCREEN?
>> Moreno: AND THAT IS-- YES
WHEN SHE SAYS, "DON'T YOU TOUCH
ME."
>> DON'T YOU TOUCH ME!
>> Moreno: AND I THOUGHT, "HOW
WOULD MARLON SAY THAT AS AN
ACTOR?"
AND IT WAS THROUGH MY TEETH
"DON'T YOU TOUCH ME."
THAT IS THE SCENE THAT I KNOW
GOT ME THE OSCAR.
>> RITA MORENO IN "WEST SIDE
STORY."
>> Whitaker: IN 1962, MORENO
BECAME THE FIRST LATINA TO WIN
AN ACADEMY AWARD FOR ACTING.
>> Moreno: I CAN'T BELIEVE IT.
>> Whitaker: SO, YOUR PHONE MUST
HAVE BEEN RINGING OFF THE HOOK
AFTER THAT-
>> Moreno: NO, THE PHONE WASN'T
RINGING OFF THE HOOK.
AFTER "WEST SIDE STORY" I
COULDN'T GET A JOB EXCEPT IN
GANG MOVIES, LESSER ONES.
>> Whitaker: YOUR CAREER DID NOT
JUST TAKE OFF?
>> Moreno: HARDLY.
>> Whitaker: SO YOU TOOK OFF.
>> Moreno: YEAH.
>> Whitaker: SHE MOVED TO NEW
YORK AND FOUND NEW LOVE AND NEW
ROLES ON BROADWAY.
SHE MARRIED A CARDIOLOGIST, THE
LATE LENNY GORDEN, AND THEY HAD
A DAUGHTER, FERNANDA.
IT WAS HERE IN THE '70s
ALONGSIDE MORGAN FREEMAN, THAT
MORENO WON HER FIRST GRAMMY WITH
THE TV SHOW, "THE ELECTRIC
COMPANY," THEN A TONY FOR HER
OUTRAGEOUS BROADWAY CREATION,
GOOGIE GOMEZ.
AND WITH THE HELP OF A GREEN
FROG, AN EMMY ROUNDED OUT THE
EGOT.
IF ALL THE PUPPETS AND SLAPSTICK
GIVE THE IMPRESSION MORENO HAD
GONE TO THE LIGHT SIDE, LOOK
AGAIN.
IN THE GRITTY, HBO DRAMA, "OZ,"
IN THE 1990'S, SHE PLAYED PRISON
PSYCHOLOGIST, SISTER PETER
MARIE.
>> Whitaker: A DIFFERENT KIND OF
NUN.
>> Moreno: DIFFERENT KIND OF
>> STOP IT!
STOP IT.
STOP IT!
>> Moreno: IT WAS THE SALVATION
OF ME AS AN ACTRESS, NOT A
CAREER.
>> Whitaker: SINCE "OZ," MORENO
HAS KEPT WORKING STRAIGHT INTO
THE 21st CENTURY: MOVIES, TV, A
SITCOM WITH LEGENDARY PRODUCER,
NORMAN LEAR.
SHE'S BEEN WORKING NON-STOP FOR
75 YEARS.
AND NOW THIS.
♪ ♪ ♪
IN STEVEN SPIELBERG'S VERSION OF
"WEST SIDE STORY," MORENO PLAYS
VALENTINA, THE WIDOW OF DOC, WHO
OWNED THE CANDY STORE IN THE
ORIGINAL.
SHE'S ALSO AN EXECUTIVE PRODUCER
OF THE FILM BEING RELEASED
DECEMBER 10.
>> TAKE 12.
( CLAP )
>> Steven Spielberg: SHE'S PART
OF THE ENSEMBLE.
>> Whitaker: WE TALKED WITH
STEVEN SPIELBERG REMOTELY.
>> Spielberg: I WANTED HER TO
REALLY, YOU KNOW, BRIDGE THE
LEGACY OF "WEST SIDE STORY" AND
TO INSPIRE OUR YOUNG CAST.
>> Whitaker: AND UNLIKE THE
FIRST MOVIE, SPIELBERG SET A
MANDATE THAT ALL PUERTO RICAN
CHARACTERS BE PLAYED BY HISPANIC
ACTORS.
>> Moreno: I THINK HOLLYWOOD HAS
CHANGED.
I THINK THERE ARE STILL THINGS
YET TO BE ADDRESSED.
THE REPRESENTATION THAT
HISPANICS GET IS ALMOST NIL.
THERE ARE SO MANY TALENTED
PEOPLE AMONG HISPANICS.
JENNIFER LOPEZ CAN'T BE THE ONLY
ONE.
>> Whitaker: THAT'S WHY MORENO
WAS THRILLED TO BE PART OF THIS
"WEST SIDE STORY."
>> Whitaker: SHE SINGS?
>> Spielberg: SHE SINGS AND SHE
ACTS AND EVEN THOUGH SHE DOESN'T
HAVE A DANCE NUMBER, I HAVE HOME
MOVIES OF RITA DANCING WITH ALL
THE SHARKS AND THE JETS.
SHE HAS NOT LOST HER MOJO AS A
DANCER, AT ALL.
>> Whitaker: RITA MORENO, WHO IS
ABOUT TO TURN 90, HASN'T LOST A
STEP.
SHE ADMITS SHE HAS STUMBLED
ALONG THE WAY, BUT SHE HAS
REFUSED TO STAY DOWN.
>> Moreno: I THINK SOME PEOPLE
WOULD SAY I WAS TOUGH.
I THINK IT'S RESILIENCE, BECAUSE
IF I'M TOUGH, THERE'S A PART OF
ME THEN THAT'S BECOME HARD.
IT'S SIMPLY NOT IN MY NATURE.
>> Whitaker: BUT RESILIENT?
>> Moreno: RESILIENT IS WHAT I
AM.
I'M A REAL BOUNCER-BACKER.
♪ ♪ ♪
( TICKING )
>> WHY RITA MORENO THOUGHT THE
ORIGINAL "WEST SIDE STORY" FILM
WOULD BE A FLOP...
>> Moreno: BOY, WAS I WRONG!
>> Stahl: NEXT SUNDAY ON
"60 MINUTES," A LOOK INSIDE THE
WORLD OF HIGH FASHION.
SHARYN ALFONSI HEADS TO ROME TO
MEET ALESSANDRO MICHELE, THE
DESIGNER BEHIND THE "BEAUTIFUL
STRANGENESS" THAT HAS BECOME THE
GUCCI BRAND.
>> Alfonsi: SOME OF THE CLOTHES
REALLY SCREAM, RIGHT?
( LAUGHS )
>> Alessandro Michele:
SOMETIMES.
>> Alfonsi: I DON'T FEEL LIKE
YOU COULD BE A SHY PERSON AND
PULL SOME OF THOSE LOOKS OFF.
>> Michele: I THINK THAT FASHION
NEEDS TO LET TO THE PEOPLE HEAR
YOUR VOICE.
>> Stahl: I'M LESLEY STAHL.